talking to Colin Franklin.
Do we have a name for this wonderful place, or do we just... Michael Fraun of Collins.
Okay.
Michael Fraun of Collins.
It's wonderful.
And I'll put this close, if that's okay with you.
Yep.
It's your book, Byron and Collins.
Yeah.
Go ahead.
I'm sorry, continue.
You're saying it's not that unusual for the person to do.
to be a dealer as well as a collector.
It's not at all unusual for a bookseller to have a private collection.
It may be very irritating to the visitor, but it's not at all unusual.
It's very, I think sometimes it's, by the way, I also ask you before, do you mind, if we make two questions, what I'd like to... How about auction, go ahead.
If there's a good thing at auction, the only reason why, which allows you to get it is that you pay
more for it than anybody else present things sensible i agree and i think so every my feeling is for every for every winner and option there's also another better but john mag said well that's not always well that's the last thing i wouldn't know but the the um no i believe you're right actually i have some reason to think that that is so but um
Every success for a permanent object auction will have been thought silly by everybody else who didn't get it, not on grounds of jealousy, but because if they thought it sensible, they would have bought it.
If they had the money to do, sir.
Do you mind if I leave this on now?
No, they might talk.
You'll have to accept my words that
if there's something that you don't want me to use, I won't.
Yes, very good.
Okay, and on my tape here, but we were talking about the garden.
I obviously want to talk to you about a few other things as well, but I would be less than frank if I didn't tell you this is very good.
Yes, I see, yes.
All right, so let's talk about the garden.
Let's.
As I say, I've talked to a ton of people, fascinating stories about it.
And I almost reached a point yesterday with another person who knew him very well, where I almost became very depressed.
Because I've reached the point now where I think I know him pretty well.
And it is depressing, you know.
Because I don't, it's not my goal to blow this guy out of the water.
It is my goal to tell the story of what happened, how the guy was doing to me.
Let me ask you this directly.
I know that you did a lot of business with Hayden.
A certain amount.
Not a lot.
I mean, from time to time, the things we did were few added up as numbers of sales, transactions.
Did you ever have any idea that he had a silent partner?
No.
This fascinated me about him philosophically because true and false, he was
a philosopher, and it was important to him to project that.
And I've no doubt that his greatest satisfaction would have been to be accepted as a man of deep wisdom, which I'm not judging this, I'm not offering this as any judgment,
at all and just um except to say that's what i felt was his chief wish um i'm not i would not judging i mean i'm not saying whether i believe he was a great philosopher i'm not allowing that to enter the story at all i just that he um that that was a very important to him to be accepted as a profound thinker and i think collecting is a secondary activity for anybody uh and and
Collecting is an inferior activity, and if you are a first-rate person, probably you don't need to collect.
Collecting is a substitution for being, because by collecting you are identifying, you're creating something which isn't yours, but which is somebody else's, and you're bringing it upon yourself.
But can a collection be a complex expression?
It can be an expression of yourself because you're not the creator.
You're merely borrowing other people and identifying with them because you're wealthy enough to do so.
The point is you're the one who determines the focus, I think.
You exercise your taste, which is a good secondary activity, like decorating a room.
But it's not the primary activity, which is writing.
That is why, by the way,
I am doing a considerable chapter on creative people.
Yes.
Yes, yes.
A very good example.
Harry McMurtry is another.
He's a dealer.
I know, yes.
But he's an interesting man.
Yes, I know nothing of his collecting.
He's got four bookstores, right?
I know, but that doesn't... I mean, the quality of them is more important than the extent of them.
They're not bad, but they're not wonderful.
But I have to talk to him.
Yes.
The point.
Ricky Jay, the magician, is an interesting character.
Do you know him?
No.
He's a really great, prominent magician.
He's an entrepreneur.
Yep.
And he has what is said to be the finest collections
of books on magic.
Yes.
Oh, yes, that's very... And he has learned his craft from these books.
Yes, yes, yes.
Those are useful books.
Have No More was a collector of useless books, which is what interests me more, really.
I'm more interested in useless books.
So if anybody asks me, as of course one often does get asked, what do you specialize in?
The only sensible answer I can give is useless books.
And that was a definition that, well, most books are useless, you see, and this one is using them.
Using them to what?
To build a house?
No, using them to work from.
To build a house, in other words, to... As working tools.
To figure some way to split the atom.
No, using them, you use paperbacks.
And...
Actually, the two bookcases, that one and that, which you're looking at now, are my working tools at the moment.
So I'm not only interested in useless books, but this is a more recent development because one changes.
But a Shakespeare folio in the hands of Haven Amor is a useless book.
All his books were useless, but he wasn't using them.
He wouldn't say that.
No, because he wouldn't use... The decision was to capture the energy contained in the text, and pass on to the generations yet unborn.
Well, if you buy that one, then you're buying a mystic outlook.
But functionally, and I agree with that, I think books are very important presences, and atmospheric presences in a room.
Of course, I'm ready to talk a lot of nonsense on that subject.
I wish you were.
I need some quotes.
But I think that...
No, that he was not collecting functional books.
Mostly they were kept in bank vaults or somewhere comparable.
And it's wonderful to have as a sort of decor, like old furniture, as a decor in the house where it belongs, not in an antique shop.
It's nice to have a library.
Why do you think he acquired these?
Well, I think he probably looked to the day when he would build his ideal home and ideal library and have them around him.
He wanted to build, by the way, the Institute of Traditional Science on land that they acquired in Cambridge.
I don't know if you're familiar with it.
Yes, I am, yes.
I know where he had, and no way has his civil house, yes.
That whole little triangle there.
Yes, he had nothing but legal actions, I know about all that.
Well, I found out, well, it's all recorded.
He wanted to pull things down.
He did pull things down.
Yes.
About authorisation, and all of these structures followed in a historic district.
The interesting thing... That sounds like a behavior than what I was going to say.
Well, I was interested, you were asking me about his, whether I knew there was a partner and so on.
It interested me his money thing and his attitude to money and his projection about that because the impression he gave was an interesting one but the reality turns out not to have been interesting.
The impression he gave was that he was a kind of, if you like, sort of philosopher king that he...
was a very unusual kind of person, which he is, who had the ability, which is extremely rare, to think when he chose and live the philosophical life.
And then when he chose, to turn off that and to turn on the money-making task.
If he needed another supplied money, he would just tune into that wavelength and make what money he needed, and then turn off again and come back into the philosophical mode and buy what books he wanted.
Now, that was an impressive scenario, and I believed in it.
Did you believe he held all these patents?
He never talked to me about patents.
He didn't want to talk about how he made money.
It was always a mystery.
You mentioned to Bill Scheide about patents.
Did he?
I could sell another patent, he said.
Yes, I see.
$200 million.
I see.
Well, no, he didn't mention patents.
He mentioned at the end something he'd invested heavily in, which I suppose I don't know.
He may have talked about it.
It may have been totally fiction, or it may have been true and disastrous.
I have no idea.
But apart from that particular thing,
which I think he asked me not to mention, whether because it was totally untrue or whether it was totally private, I've no idea, but as he asked me not to mention, I did not mention it.
It was a project, though.
It was a project.
And so when I learned that, in other words, I had totally, he totally gave the impression he was buying with his own money.
And when I learned, and he lived fairly high, but you don't have to be very rich to live fairly high,
When I learned that this was not so, only at the time of the sale, and that he was using somebody else's money, that was a little disillusioning.
But he, I mean, in his private life, apart from his book life, he was very kind to us.
We enjoyed his hospitality in Acapulco and in Arkansas.
I didn't actually visit him in his home in
So there was nothing secret about that.
Other people have done so.
A lot of people haven't, though.
He really wouldn't let people into the Cambridge House.
Well, he would have let me into the Cambridge House if we'd been staying in Boston and suggested calling.
We were sufficiently friendly for that.
And, say, Richard Lyon and Paul of Quaritches used to go there, and Arthur Freeman.
It's not unknown for people to go there.
Arthur's been in his house.
Arthur has been in his house.
Yes.
Yeah.
Arkansas.
I thought it was Kentucky.
That's where the wife is from.
From Arkansas, yes.
Okay.
He's from Texas, I believe.
Yes, yes.
Do you know where in Texas?
I can't remember.
Do you think, is Haven no more his actual name?
I don't know.
He, I don't know.
It's most unlikely.
Of course, Haven no more, but he, it's not the kind of thing you ask a man, certainly not him, because he would have, he didn't want
particularly private questions.
Did he ever indicate what his education was?
Yes, I can't quite remember, but my wife will remember, probably.
I always forget people's private histories.
The interesting thing about his education was that he, again, as we now know, he was a man who pretended to some extent
They're not, I'm not dismissing him as a pretender in philosophy, because I think he, I had many talks with him, philosophical talks, if you like to use a grand phrase, and I always find him stimulating, but totally exhausting.
And so vain as to be totally impossible and ridiculous, but of course it's very important to him not to seem ridiculous.
to be taken totally seriously was very, very important in his life.
I had farcically stupid talks with him.
I heard him saying things that I thought nobody could make such an ass of himself publicly as he was doing.
But that wouldn't please him to have that remark quoted to him.
I think...
He did, it was very important to him to be accepted as a, well, now as to his education, he gave one of the impressions that he was, one of the trails he laid was, of course, that he was fluent in Greek, for instance.
It would not surprise me at all to learn that he didn't know Greek, but I may go wrong.
Yes.
Where the dedication is to his wife in Greek.
Well, that's not a great achievement.
That's not a great achievement.
I mean, he could have had a little help about that.
And it is ancient Greek, isn't it?
No, from his conversation, I mean, dedication to his wife and Greek is easy game.
From his conversation, you would imagine that he read Plato in the original with some ease and Homer and so on.
Now, it wouldn't surprise me.
Neither would surprise me.
It wouldn't astonish me to learn that's true.
My wife would actually be totally astonished to learn it's true.
It wouldn't astonish me at all to hear that it's totally untrue.
and that he had students or research assistants that provided, which is very usual, to provide a literal translation, and he made of it what he chose.
I think that's much more likely.
He gave one the impression that a hundred or so learned manuscripts was the measure of his achievement over the last 20 years or so, 25 years, whatever, and I sometimes wondered whether he'd written anything.
Everything he has written is self-published, by the way.
But practically nothing is published.
I mean, anybody can scribble a few poems.
That's what I'm saying.
I mean... Yes.
And that's about the measure of it.
He's published himself.
Again, yes.
Oh, I see what you mean, yes.
We call humanity publishing.
Yes, quite.
But I mean, it's about one slender thing.
Oh, it's 16 poems.
And he showed me, with pride, in his Arkansas home, a...
a learned work, I forget what it was, published by the Bollingham Foundation or some such place, with, at the beginning, an acknowledgement to him or even a dedication.
Well, again, that's not such a thing.
It probably means he's provided some cash.
Yes.
So his achievement was very standard.
And I think that he had considerable fear of going into print and not being recognized for the guru that he would have us think
he was, and that's why he didn't go into print, because perhaps he felt, with his deep uncertainty, of course, which is the clue to him, that anything printed and subject to public scrutiny would show him up to be the man he didn't wish to seem.
That's the clue to him.
He said this is the clue to him, the deep uncertainty.
Yes.
In fact, I'd go probably further than I said, probably enough self-knowledge to realize that he really was a charlatan, but he would never have wanted that to be exposed, and so he didn't go into print.
Do you remember the name of the town in Arkansas?
No.
Could it have been Harrison?
Harrison, a name like that.
His wife is from this town, is that right?
I think so.
And this is why they...
Yes.
They don't now, I believe.
It's all sold, I'm not sure.
I think Arkansas, Acapulco is sold.
They don't have any children, right?
No.
He has children?
Yes, I believe, by first, early marriage.
So he does have a history.
You see a lot of people, I mean, there have been wild speculations about him.
Yes.
As you can well imagine, in the book circle.
The CIA becomes full-blown out of the 1950s.
No, he talked about, and this I totally believe, he talked with recollection about the Korean War.
MacArthur's staff, right?
I didn't know about MacArthur's staff, but about being blown up by a bomb and arriving safely down again as if he were just on a safe parachute.
Somehow the way he talked about this made me believe in it absolutely, and I still believe in it absolutely.
Do you think that was the epiphanous moment in his wife?
I mean, if you read this Institute of Traditional Science, and what is traditional science, you read their preface to the sale, the man is really, he reads poems.
They're just consumed with visions of death.
Yes, yes.
Frightening, I mean, disturbing, I think.
Well, he wasn't a trivial author, I mean, he wasn't,
He's not a man I shall ever forget.
He was not a negligible man.
Except whether he was... You see, another great vanity of his, of great importance to it, was that he should seem very young.
I think he's about my age.
I'm 66.
I think he's about that sort of age, probably.
And he would have had us think he was 45, I mean, for a long time.
He's constantly looking at mirrors, I'm told.
He's...
He is constantly looking at himself in mirrors.
Is he?
Yes, yes, yes.
I guess this was from some person who's happened to see him often.
Yes, yes.
Then he was, I mean, he was a very obsessional person, but in his Arkansas house, which was, I mean, he treated us with considerable hospitality.
He put us up, not in the house, because nobody must, this is part of the tale, but...
He put us up in the very hyper-luxurious hotel called Las Brisas.
He said, I don't stay in luxurious hotels.
I don't dine out.
It's not a hotel in town.
It's a famous sort of villa settlement up the hill, which is in fact a hotel.
New Mexico.
New Mexico?
No, not New Mexico.
No, Mexico.
Sorry, Mexico.
Mexico.
Acapulca, I'm talking about now.
I'm sorry, that is some kind of concern.
No, I've switched to Acapulca, his house in Acapulca.
He was very obsessional about that.
Did you see the house?
Yes, but we were put in one of these villas and treated very, very well, frankly expensive and all that.
And his house was built...
to some mystic scale of proportion that he purported to have discovered in the Mayan civilization.
And, well, briefly, once, for instance, Laurier was showing us around some of it, and Charlotte, my wife, sat down on a sofa that was out in a sort of open spot.
And Haven came out and clearly frowned.
And when she got up, he went over to it and dusted it with his hand and put things straight, you see.
I mean, he was obsessional to that extent.
What are you making of this?
Well, I leave that to the psychoanalysts.
I mean, he was... He's not supposed to be concerned with things.
I don't know about... These are things, that's right.
It's obsessional.
I mean, the word anal comes to mind.
I don't know what.
I mean, people use these loose words.
But he was not normal in that way.
He was quite... Did any of this...
Why wouldn't that frighten you to disturb you?
Well, I'll tell you another thing about him.
And I think, I mean, through all this that I'm saying, his underlying kindness, believe it or not, kindliness, that I was very affectionate about him.
Not only because he's chosen to buy books from me, but because I think we did enjoy each other's company, and...
conversation and talked of quite fundamental things and I mean one days of him in a long while was enough but it was it interested me but for instance a good thing was going back to books his response to books
was very emotional.
I bought for him once.
It only happened once that I bought something.
I don't buy things for people at auction.
It's not my life.
It doesn't interest me.
I wouldn't mind because it's money for nothing.
But that's not how I spend my time doing that.
But there was one occasion when Haven asked me, because he bought a notable Yates manuscript from me,
to buy another one at Sotheby's, the one he bought, hadn't been from Sotheby's, it was mine.
And an important, hate the word, important manuscript of Yeats' poems dropped up.
It was in the garden sale.
I think these two Yeats things didn't sell at the garden sale, actually.
There were only two things that didn't.
But that was neither here nor there.
Six lots.
Well, those are two of them.
Anyway, probably they were too ambitious in prices.
The 8th manuscript I bought, yes, and it looked a boring thing in a big sort of old ledger, I'd see.
So, bindings, and that's an obsessional subject, if any ever is, and the condition of books generally, but bindings and boxes for bindings, and all this is very important for Haven, you see.
Box things in beautifully, like relicers.
That doesn't figure according to his mandate, binding.
That's exterior.
Well, it's exterior, but it's like a reliquary covering a relic or any metaphor you choose to use.
So this particular manuscript, it was in fact very important for him to have things boxed properly, and I took it to a binder he knows and I know in Oxford who boxed it handsomely in green leather and all that, a big object it became.
I took it to America during my next visit and we arranged to meet
at Boston, and he was going, he took me in Laurier, met me at the airport, and drove me to some hotel, I forget which, where we would have lunch, and I would hand this over.
And Laurier and I were sitting at a table, and he came in, and I had this green thing, and put it in front of him on the table, we cleared a little space before lunch.
And he simply said, excuse me, I can't face this, and went out again for about 10 minutes to wherever he went, Laverture or somewhere.
It just, the very sight of it was overwhelming to him, and he had to compose himself and come back and be able to view it.
Well, that's a very genuine response to an exciting object.
And this was absolutely authentic.
I mean, this was not anything written.
I don't think he'd rehearsed this or planned it or anything.
That touches me, by the way.
And something else he had for me, which was a very emotional object, which managed to give diaries of the dancer Nijinsky.
Which really didn't figure in that collection, by the way.
It was in the garden cell.
But I mean, it didn't figure as part of the collection.
You said it was an outsider, as a... Well, I mean, it just didn't figure as an item in the sky.
if I understood the scope of it.
It didn't figure to me to be part of it.
Well, it was an artist's... I mean, Haven would use some... If he took dance as an art, it would be necessary for him to think that Nizhinsky was the greatest dancer in the history of something, and here were his private thoughts, so this was figured, I would say.
I would think so.
And in this room, I was telling him about it once, when I had it,
and started to, he asked me about it and I explained why I found it a very exciting document.
This is something you wanted to acquire for yourself?
Yes, I bought it, and I suppose I, myself explaining it quite emotionally anyway, he said, well, stop, I can't bet it anymore, and I must just have this.
And he, again, he found it to
to upset him, to hear, and he just identified with it.
Is this, I heard a story somewhere that, I don't know if this was you, but this was something, there was something that somebody else planned to get at an auction, telling him about it, and it didn't apply it.
It wasn't me, no.
And it's so aroused, and he might now pick the other guy who told him about it, and acquire it, and I have the names,
No, no, I didn't buy it for him.
You mean the Nizhinsky, I didn't buy it for him.
No, no, I owned it.
Everything that I sold him I owned, except that particular Yeats.
So you basically acquire for stock as the phrase, though.
Yes, I don't like the phrase, but yes, perfectly true.
Well, a better phrase.
No, it is.
No, I'm not criticizing you for using it.
It's the general phrase.
Yes.
Which impresses me because that is traditional book.
Otherwise, it's just trading.
And that is mostly what happens in book selling now.
That as soon as anybody gets a good thing, he rings up somebody.
Or there's the terrible phrase, I have somebody for this.
Whereas proper book selling, I think, is that you have things.
And if somebody...
chooses to come and view what you have and wants to have something of it, then he buys it.
Let's talk a little bit about that.
I put no log on the fire.
Let's see how this machine is doing.
Oh, I'm sorry.
...which he was born.
They were doing mushrooms, you know, and it was tumbled down for the 17th century.
Beautiful.
Did you arrive prior to the power station or after?
Before.
I would have guessed that.
I don't mind the power station.
It's not atomic.
Oh, it's not?
It looks atomic.
There.
Oh, great.
I feel better.
It's on the railway lines, and it starts where or wherever you come to.
That's right.
My family has a house on Cape Cod, and he's facing these days.
There he is.
there's a power station.
For years I thought it was because there is a nuclear station in Plymouth, and I always thought that was it.
And it's not, but the nuclear station is actually 20 miles further, so that now doesn't bother me anymore.
I don't think you'd like to live under the shadow of a nuclear station.
No.
Let's talk about your own, unless you feel that there are any
if fruitful areas I could pursue any further or more.
No, I think we probably talked around that.
It's almost... Were you depressed when you heard about... The sale?
Not the sale, so much the circumstances.
Yes, a little bit.
I suppose I felt slightly let down.
I felt that there'd been some deception in our relationship, if you like.
Shakespeare would have been the outside falsehood path.
I mean, it's almost like...
I mean, this man had been pretending to be something he wasn't, and I thought I was rather sad for him, but I felt it's always very humiliating when you are exposed.
I wasn't exposed for anything scandalous, as far as I was concerned, but he was shown to be a lesser man, if you like, and that's a bit sad that he had to appear like that.
And certainly not the man that he purported himself.
No, but I was sorry for him for having to say this, if you like.
Has he been in contact since this?
No.
Yes, sorry.
He wrote me a touching letter saying that...
that he was faced with, I think his phrase was selling his spiritual children into slavery.
Not a phrase I think should be quoted as it was a private letter, but that's what he... I won't, but he has used... Used it by other people, I see.
Yeah.
Stop phrase, okay.
Well, the image, I can't say it's the same phrase, but the image of the children being sold in the country.
Yes.
I think that's fair enough.
But I can sympathize with that, and that is the kind of image that you would... Don't worry about that.
Okay, let's talk about you, because I am quite interested in... We started talking about Colin Franklin, the collector, and also the book viewer.
I don't like the word dealer actually, but it's a very common word and it comes in all the time and it got quite historic, it's not just new.
But somehow it's the wrong word.
I think dealer suggests making deals on the stock exchange or something.
I don't make deals.
You sell things.
If people ask what I am, I'll say I'm a bookseller.
And I think other sides of my life is rather pretentious to say if one is doing anything else.
I enjoy out of self-respect, I think, writing things.
I do enjoy writing things simply because it seems to me that to buy books at one price and sell them at another is not a particularly satisfactory way of parting your years in this world.
better than that.
I don't mean that my writing is better.
I mean that something other than merely buying and selling, I like to have on hand.
Before we continue, I don't, I know that I've gathered to myself, I did mention the creative people who do collect, and I mentioned Baskin.
Could you think of any other people that would be wise for me to?
Artists who collect.
Not necessarily of painters, of any kind of artists, a writer, a creative person who collects.
David Garrick, you know.
Oh, yes.
If there was such a person today.
Yes.
He's a wonderful example, I think.
Yes, yes.
I'm impressed by Michael Sadler.
William Morris.
Outstanding.
Michael Sadler, I think, was an interesting... Yes, yes.
William Morris is a good example.
He's a great example.
He's a great example, yes.
But I can't think of any living, breathing examples.
I can't think of who I know who's...
out of the blue, think of ripest painters.
It's become a much more expensive thing to do.
So really rich people collect these days.
That's one of the... Well, it's hadnesses.
It is still accessible.
I mean, you know, the night before the garden sale got underway, the very night, Sotheby's sold to Kuni to a Japanese for $22 million.
And the whole garden sale, $314, was $16 million.
Yes.
And yet, well, this is relative, this is relative, but you see, the people say Oxford, which is seven miles from where we're talking, there are no Oxford collectors these days, because they can't afford it on university salaries.
A generation ago, John Sparrow, Warden Wall-Sales, or a doctor called Ben-Jule Jensen, and...
and an outsider, I mean, outside the university, Simon Nelsmith, could form quite notable collections.
Well, Nelsmith's a fairly wealthy man, but the others I don't think were really.
If you had taste and chose what you wanted and cared about books, you could form a magnificent collection without big outlay, apart from inflation and that sort of stuff.
I've had, by the way, 20 years.
My book life has been divided into two after I left university.
I was 20 years in publishing, and I've been 20 years a bookseller, so that's this year.
You're very interesting to me because your life has been involved with books all this time.
Books from just about every... Yes.
On every side of the side.
And I've never had any money, and still don't have any money.
But in the later years, when I was
in publishing my later years.
And when I found that I didn't actually have an overdraft at the bank, I found that it was very pleasant to go out to a bookshop and spend a few pounds on a nice book.
Did you become a collector after you were publishing?
No, before.
But I mean, become a collector is a grand phrase.
I used to go out and buy some nice books occasionally, a nice book, and spend longer and longer
after lunch in mags or quarry or somewhere very variable like that and buy something i couldn't afford and agonize every for night or something like that and and so on and so i had formed by the time i chose to leave publishing quite a nice well two collections really i got a good collection of private press books with which i'm a bit sort of um
associated, if anybody associates me with anything, because I wrote a book about private places and so on.
Well, in a way, I'm sort of out of it a bit now, because one gets interested in other things.
I think that's a great, for me, a great pleasure of bookselling, is that one is not necessarily a specialist, but it's possible to follow whim into other directions.
It may not be prosperous, but it's possible.
But you see, the point of saying all this is that in the 1960s, which is not all that time ago as my life sees it, between 1963 and 1970, I performed a pretty good collection of private press books, including a Kermsker Press set printed on vellum.
all those books which were printed on vellum, except for one important exception, which was the Chaucer, and that was the copy inscribed by Morris and Byrne Jones to Swinburne.
So... Where is that copy now?
In Paul Mellon's collection, I think.
And that, without having money, I could collect these things, you see.
And so... And I formed a good collection of...
color plate books, as they're called, aquatint books, really, that was my period, period of about 1780 to 75 to 1835, and wrote a book about that.
But the thing is that the scene has changed, and anybody wanting to make such a collection now would have to be fairly wealthy, not like your Japanese example, but fairly wealthy, so that it's become an uncivilized thing,
which the lousy rich can do, and which well-supported institutions can do with some hesitation and condescension.
And the pleasantly interested men who would like, or women who would like to, chiefly men who collect, would like to buy books, can't.
They buy great recognizable books, but I think there still are delightful surprises out there.
They can still buy things, but new subjects, I mean, I feel great contempt for, one shouldn't feel contempt, it's bad things for you, but I feel great contempt for modern first edition collecting and the whole... Why?
the whole world of the dust wrapper, which is a useless thing I throw away.
Yes, I was totally shocked, totally shocked to hear a friend who was a librarian of a university in the United States where I was teaching for a term a couple of years ago.
Where was it?
Tulsa, Oklahoma, University of Tulsa.
Tom Staley there?
Tom Staley was there.
I'm not... Oh, yes.
Well, I was with Tom about a couple of months ago in Austin.
No, this is the librarian at the university, who was a good friend, and with whom I went to Chicago while I was there on a book call.
And we stayed with the librarian of Chicago University, who's just died.
And we went to his seminar and were asked to talk.
the librarian said to them that about two-thirds of the value, I forget what he said, of their collections, their special collections, their precious special collections, and they spent tremendously on them, were in the dust trappers.
Now, what is the university doing with spending two-thirds of its colossal, no, no, this is Tulsa, on dust trappers?
which are useless bits of adornment.
Do you think Tom had anything?
Yes, actually, yes.
I mean, I'm not, again, you mustn't quote me on this.
That's probably why they hired him for Texas, because it's consistent with the Texas mandate.
I think they hired him.
He's a very good person to be at the Human Services Center, I think.
Very nice person.
I like him.
He's a very good person.
He's probably diplomatic and isn't going to continue the rather... He's like Deca Turner.
That's right.
And he's not passionate about books.
He's got a nice Joyce collection.
He's interested in Joyce.
And he's interested in Joyce.
And modern writers and women writers and all these fashionable things.
But...
and in filling the gaps.
He's the man they need for now, I think, because they've had the adventures, they've had the explorations for the North and South Pole, and now what they need is to live with it a little bit.
And he's presiding over this.
Settle down a little bit.
Yeah.
And that process is in many ways.
Did you know Lou Feltman, though?
Yes.
Could you give me any... Yes, I admired Lou Feltman.
He was one...
perhaps a rather simple thing to say by Luke Feldman, is that he was perfectly a man of his word.
Can I quote you directly on this?
Yes, I have no objection to that.
I have Charles Hamilton on the other side, you know, who's, frankly, such vicious, I think, damn well, if you're alive, libelous things.
I see, well, he was... Without any backup, as a matter of fact.
In my connections with him, he...
He died, I forget what year, but I hadn't been many years in books saying he died, but we did several quite, for me, quite major things together.
And he was perfectly correct in everything he did with me.
And he trusted me, and I trusted him.
He learnt to trust me, I'll tell you how, it's not worth quoting particularly, forbid it, but it's not interesting.
Over a small thing, I'd bought, I had here a collection of manuscripts
a not terribly important author called Richard Le Gallien, an author of the 90s.
How do we spell it?
An author of the 90s, L-E... You mustn't ask me how you spell things, my spelling's terrible.
L-E with a G, then I'll find it.
L-E and then the next word, Le Gallien.
It may even be Le Gallien, it's Le Gallien.
Anyway, and Feldman wanted to buy these, they were very attractive.
And I told him I'd bought them from Krauss in New York, and...
and that he could have them for 10% more than I paid for them.
I don't tell that, I tell that aspect of it, it's only stupid, because I should have asked much more.
But I suppose it's an expression of no confidence.
Anyway, that's what I said.
And he agreed.
And then to my surprise, he said, well, I think I'd, if you wouldn't mind just showing me Krause's receipt to prove to me that you're telling me the truth about that.
Yes, that's surprising.
We found Christ's receipt and showed it to him and he said, I could see that impressed him because people say these things and they don't even know he could see that I bought it for that and I was offering it to him for 10% more.
Ever offered, I think he trusted me totally.
He was a bit of a pirate and
And he wanted, I told you that I owned... What was the word, pirate?
Yes.
C-I-R-A-T-E.
Yes, I told you that I owned the collection of, this was another good thing in our relationship, of Kelmscott books printed on vellum.
And he wanted to buy it.
He wanted to actually...
I did, you know, cite a minute.
I'd prepared a whole catalogue of books printed on vellum.
I don't do catalogues now, but this I'd done.
And before I'd offered it for sale, I'd prepared the catalogue, put it into proof.
And he came here at that moment, and he wanted to buy, as well as held in a gesture, I wanted to buy a whole catalogue, you see, of books printed on vellum.
I wasn't against selling it, it was a great help to me to sell a big thing.
And we agreed the price at which you'd buy it, and that was that.
And, hello?
And he went away, that was that.
And then about, so we arranged, I don't know what we arranged, a dispatch or something, and about two or three weeks.
I'm sorry, do you think these things went to Texas probably?
No, he didn't.
I know the future there.
He may have hoped they would, didn't?
Two or three... A short time later, I was on holiday, I think, and the dollar fell against the pound.
I'd sold it in pounds, yes.
And Feldman sent me a letter or a cable or something saying that he would have to offer less because he wasn't prepared to...
pay more than that, and he was now finding himself paying more, so he wished to adjust the price.
I sent him a telegram saying that the books were sold in pounds.
If he didn't wish to go ahead, would he send me a telegram, that's how telegrams entered, before or within three days or something like this, and he sent a telegram saying he wished to buy the collection.
Again, I think that earned his respect, that I sort of stood out, you see.
And he felt that we were on terms, and we... Well, you understood each other.
Understood each other, yes.
Yes, I think so.
I mean, I don't like this kind of thing, because, so am I being a businessman, I'm not against that.
I don't like tension in it, and I now don't have it.
But that was a sort of fraught moment, but I thought it was a stand to take.
But maybe it was the incident that had to take place.
Yes, that's right.
That's the sort of thing.
But he, apart from business things like that, he was, like many booksellers, he put a tough front to the world.
But he was devoted to his books.
He knew his books.
He knew his books and would get, well, in a certain way, he knew his books.
It depends what you mean by new.
He certainly knew his detective fiction.
Yes.
Texas has probably the finest detective fiction collection because of this.
Because of him.
He used to.
He said, I remember when he couldn't sleep, he got up in the middle of the night and just liked running around among his books.
I mean, I don't know what was going through his head, whether it was dollars or literature, but anyway, he liked the presence of his books.
Do you think he was good for Texas, for his rights?
I think he was wonderful for Texas.
He was harried at some new ways, particularly.
Yes, I think it was a great moment for buying all sorts of...
this new concept of the archive was an originality and they now live with it in a farcical way because it's all going to pieces as you know the 20th century bits of kitchen roll on which Cocteau scribbled his ideas or something become
yellow and fragile and fall to pieces and so now but they have the great conservation yes they have the great conservation that's where all the money's gone but in fact it takes um it takes a week to complete or month or whatever it is to complete the conservation of one set of proofs so um as they've got uh buildings full of it's uh they can't catch up with it do you think they brought a lot of
You're bound to buy a lot of junk when you buy as much as they did, but they bought a very large amount of genuinely useful stuff.
They cast a widen-up, and they tend to bring in a lot of different things.
Yes, yes.
No, I think they did very well.
Nicholas does say, for the record, and that's why I will call him, that he does feel that their policy, of course, this is from the scholarly side, of not allowing things to be copied is indefensible.
Yes.
And that they are perhaps the only institution in the Western world that does this, I think.
There may be one or two others.
You know, if you want microfiche or microfilm of the Robert Graves letters, you can't get them.
Yes.
And that's policy.
It's understandable policy.
You have to go to Austin and leave them there.
Yes.
No penance.
Anybody would be pleased to go to Austin and leave them there.
Er, any scholar should be delighted to go to Austen and read them round.
But Michael Holloway had to spend a lot of time there, for sure.
With what?
When he was going through a shock.
Yes, but why a better penance to spend a lot of time in Austin?
Well, why couldn't he go and Xerox the lot, pay for the Xerox and bring him back home?
Why do you have to spend two weeks there reading this stuff?
Well, yes, I'm familiar with the argument, but I don't think, my heart doesn't beat for scholars who find it necessary to spend some time in Texas.
I think it's a lovely state.
I loved it.
My wife and I were there for five days.
It was a good visit.
We sprayed.
Again, let's go back to... Tell me, by the way, when I have to go.
No, I won't tell you if you have to go.
It's okay.
If my friend rings up, I'll... It's only gardening.
We were talking about the development of Colin Franklin's bookseller, collector.
Did you become disenchanted?
I'm told that you left publishing and never looked back at the quote.
Publishing, the reason why I left publishing was really that there was a lot of committees.
I don't like committees.
I'm no good on committees.
I thought it was a great waste of time, of my time.
I don't mean my time to be so wonderfully spent in other ways, but I'm not meaning I was a precious person.
I was just empty afternoons, empty mornings.
I think it's probably still true that men, mostly men, go off to work and from
nine to five or whatever it is, they've come back saying they've had a busy day, supper ready, and really they haven't had a busy day at all, they've had a long sleepy lunch, and they've had three committees which needn't have taken place, and that's the busy day.
And committees are an enormous waste of life.
Well, publishing was becoming more managerial, there was more argument about getting a book through that one likes, I tend to cut out on that and spend more time in the bookshops.
And then one winter afternoon,
In a long committee, I decided that perhaps one only lives once and not for this.
I mean, I've told this story, it's really my own story, so I'll probably write it about one day.
And resigned that afternoon, not in committee, but on my way home to my cousin, who was the chairman, I was vice-chairman.
And I said, I thought of a good way where I could just economize.
And he was immediately interested.
And I said, they can economize on me.
And people were very nice about it.
And thought I was probably having a nervous breakdown, which I wasn't.
And a moment of complete sanity, I think.
And asked if I wouldn't like to work three days a week or take six months off or something.
I said, but I don't make a complete break.
So I arranged, I have to say in January, I arranged to resign in 1970, January 1970.
Resign in September, I thought, to give me time.
And before breakfasts, breakfasts of those nine months, I was writing my first catalogue.
That's great.
And was this, were you cataloguing your own?
Yes.
Tell me about that.
You had acquired things for yourself.
Yes.
How does one then make
the next step?
Well, I decided to be a bookseller.
One big thing is that if you, you know, the emotional phrase people always use is how can you bear to part with things?
Well, it can apply to the sad widow who has to part with things for part of their lives.
But a bookseller parting with something is on the whole very pleased and jolly about it because
It gives them some money to buy something more, and buying is the greatest fun, everybody would agree.
You'd agree with that?
Yes.
So the acquisition is the kick.
The acquisition is the kick.
And selling is a lesser kick because it allows you to acquire.
But if you make a tidy profit, that must validate your judgment and the... Yes, I mean, there are various things.
It validates your judgment, that's quite true.
It justifies your taste.
It's a...
an identity of taste, all that, so that's pleasant.
Relationships should be pleasant.
You go out and look for the night.
So you really acquire, and then people, you've built up a clientele, I gather, and we just stopped.
I knew that was about to happen.